# Migration from v8 to v9

> [!TIP]
>
> Run `pnpx @ember-intl/update` to address breaking changes. The badge `Run codemod` appears next to those that the codemod can handle.


## Breaking changes

### Minimum requirements {#breaking-changes-minimum-requirements}

Projects with these versions are supported when issues arise.

- Ember 4.12 and above
- Node 22 and above
- `@ember/test-helpers` 5.x and above


### Removed test helper `t` {#breaking-changes-removed-test-helper-t}

For a while, the documentation site recommended not using the test helper `t` because it creates a tautology: `t(...)` is equal to `t(...)` (here, the `t` refers to that from the `intl` service).

An `hasText` or `includesText` assertion, when combined with the test helper `t`, becomes weak: It only guarantees that the translation key is correct, not the rendered message.

> [!NOTE]
> 
> Even when a translation is missing (by accident), the `hasText` or `includesText` assertion would pass, since the test helper `t` can't help you verify the rendered message.

If possible, [load translations in tests](../test-helpers/add-translations#alternatives) and always pass the string that you expect to see to `hasText` and `includesText`. This way, you can easily know what the app displayed at a given time (static code analysis). You can also change translations with more confidence when assertions begin to fail.

::: code-group

```diff [tests/integration/components/hello-test.gts]
- import { setupIntl, t } from 'ember-intl/test-support';
+ import { setupIntl } from 'ember-intl/test-support';

module('Integration | Component | hello', function (hooks) {
  setupRenderingTest(hooks);
  setupIntl(hooks, 'de-de');

  test('it renders', async function (assert) {
    await render(<template><Hello @name="Zoey" /></template>);

    assert
      .dom('[data-test-message]')
-       .hasText(t('hello.message', { name: 'Zoey' }));
+       .hasText('Hallo, Zoey!');
  });
});
```

:::


### Renamed build options {#breaking-changes-renamed-build-options}

To clarify intent and remove references to implementation details in classic Ember, three of the four `buildOptions` keys that `@ember-intl/lint@v1`, `@ember-intl/v1-compat@v1`, and `@ember-intl/vite@v1` (i.e. `ember-intl@v8`) relied on have been renamed.

| Before | After |
|--|--|
| inputPath | translationsDir |
| publicOnly | bundleSeparately |
| wrapTranslationsWithNamespace | namespaceKeysByDir |

These packages will throw an error if you continue to use the old key name. Note, the key name `fallbackLocale` remains the same.
